---
title: "Rundeck Quicktips: Multi-Service Automation"
description: "Tips and tricks for setting up Rundeck jobs to manage multiple services across different environments using node tags."
date: "2020-03-23"
lastmod: "2026-06-14"
comments: true
tags:
  - "rundeck"
  - "automation"
  - "devops"
categories:
  - "tech"
draft: false
---

At work, I've been using [Rundeck](https://www.rundeck.com/open-source) for a few projects; or rather one of my colleagues introduced Rundeck to us and as new kid on the team, I was suggested to work with it. My assignment was fairly simple; though without prior knowledge on Rundeck, it was a learning curve.

### The assignment

Allow a user to select which service(s) to restart/start/stop on various selectable environments.
Ensure puppet is also stopped if the selected action is stop.

### The solution

_Bear in mind that this was my ***first*** assignment related to Rundeck._

#### Requirements

This entire thing hinges on tags; if you don't have nodes with tags, **_stop here_** and go tag your nodes properly.

- 'Details'-tab:
  - Enter a Job Name 'Start/Stop/Restart services on non-production servers'
    - In the textbox next to the Job Name, you can enter an extra folder; I added 'Non-Production'.
- 'Workflow'-tab:
  - Header 'Options'
    - Click add an Option
      - Option Type : Text
      - Option Name : environment
      - Option Label: Server Environment
      - Description : Select which environment you wish to work with; the correct servers will be selected based on this.
      - Default Value : Leave empty unless you want a default.
      - Input Type : Plain Text
      - Allowed Values : Check 'List' and enter the environments EXACTLY as they are added as tags to nodes in Rundeck.
      - Sort Values : Whatever floats your boat here; but note the _delimiter_ as this can make or break your entire setup.
      - Restrictions : Depending on what you want, I would definitely go with 'Enforced from Allowed Values' here.
      - Required: Yes
      - Should be hidden: In this case; No.
      - Multi-Valued : For the environments, No, for the services, Yes.
      - Click 'Save'.
    - Add another Option, this time:
    - Option Name : services
    - Option Label : Selected Services
    - Option Description : Select which services you which to action.
    - Multi-Valued : Yes.
